[Music]
take a ride undercover
just looking for a little commuter car
inside car dealerships 112 I meet thee
at 0% this is the trick the average
consumer sees that you think oh I can
afford that car it's troubling I want to
go in there and find out what's going on
how not to buy a car this is your
marketplace
Jenny's shopping for her first vehicle
the biggest purchase of her life and
cost is our main concern
yeah I'm just looking for cars just
looking for a little commuter car she
doesn't want to pay a lot and really
doesn't want a big debt and how much was
this one jenny is genuinely looking to
buy a car and recording it all with
hidden cameras hide everything cuz she
works for us about 2 million new cars
will be sold by the end of 2017 many of
them with the lure of low payment loans
that seem so affordable but of the
dealerships revealing everything you
need to know to find out we're calling
in the pros this car just turns heads
everywhere it goes
that's shari Primack mild-mannered
schoolteacher by day car buying expert
in his free time and that hundred
thousand dollar Lexus it's borrowed I
get to test-drive you bars every single
week don't actually even own a car Sheri
works with Mohammed Bahama 80 for months
he heads car Health Canada a popular car
buying service for consumers oh yeah
they trust what I felt
[Music]
they're dropping by to analyze the
financing advice
Jenny's hearing at dealerships all right
we're gonna get some clips looking for a
smaller car
Jenny's visiting ten dealerships in the
Toronto area that sell popular small
cars in Canada she's barely in the door
when she hears about low payments spread
over a very long time okay I think 0%
financing
yeah purpose 112 bi-weekly at 0% 1/6 c63
every two weeks every two weeks yeah
that focus on payments is a red flag for
our experts we don't even hear and all
the price of the vehicle at all although
here is the monthly payment or the
weekly payments or the primary payment I
mean that's not right it really it's not
at all over and over it's low payment my
VP spread over a long time seven years
and most of the dealerships they
instantly offer up loans of seven years
84 months 7 year and that's for 7 years
the average consumer sees that they
think oh I can afford that car I can do
manage that no problem
but it's just another way of bringing
consumers into the dealership and
selling them something that they really
can't afford car loans used to be
shorter like 48 months at an incredibly
low 2.9 percent financing then came the
Great Recession money was tight so
bottle makers teamed up with banks and
other lenders to get you buying again by
stretching out payments let's get 0%
financing for 96 months and it's working
more than half of new car loans are
seven years or longer like seven years
is a pretty long time so I'm thinking in
seven years like I don't know I might
have kids or something faster 24 months
something knowing it's paid off any kind
of one
on nearly every visit Jenny is told
paying off years early is no problem
it's an open look oh it's not Confucian
nobody knows being go some means yeah
defeat of quickly not true according to
our experts I mean yes you have the
right to pay it off but measure people
who cannot afford to pay it off and why
is that the measure of K is an
overloaded with debt so so really they
can't afford just to get suddenly you
know they get another $20,000 in one or
two years in pay off the card it's
impossible dealerships though still
suggests it and seven out of the ten
Jenny visits start by pushing long loans
they really should be telling the
shopper you know this is the price of
the vehicle these are your different
options you can financed for this much
over four years this much over five
years and so on so why isn't that
happening dealers and salespeople in
Ontario must follow a code of ethics and
the law they must be clear act with
honesty integrity and a man who enforces
it all is john carmichael we show him
the offers low payments long time that
to me is is short-sighted just a recipe
for for problems for a consumer to make
a fully informed decision they need a
lot more information than that should a
potential buyer be shown just the
long-term options or should they be told
about other options in front of them my
preference would be they should be
showing all options the more choices the
better able you are to make the best
decision for you and your family
so Jenny ended up pushing back events
against this idea of just the seven-year
long right and I'd like to show you a
little bit of that discussion do you
think that advice is fair is it honest
it's troubling when I have a young
person who's standing in front of a
situation like that looking for their
first car I would want to know that
they're going to get a lot better sales
experience I want to I want to
go in there and find out what's going on
sherry has his own theory long-term
loans with the low monthly payments
often encourage consumers to buy a more
expensive car because why buy the
affordable car for $20,000 went for a
longer loan I can buy the fancier car
for $30,000 at the same monthly payment
that is the key to bigger revenue for
automakers and dealers while a $20,000
car cost 154 bucks every two weeks on a
five-year loan a $30,000 car is just 11
bucks more payment but you're paying for
two more years that upsell is happening
to Jenny right now how much is this one
out right thirty three way higher this
is the trick the Sun leaves stop
thinking about your advice it is talking
how much you can afford and the way they
do it well don't worry you can do it for
seven years yeah and your monthly
payments going to be only this much and
then eighty four months like the car
will last that long yeah and low the car
last five years cars are more
complicated now than they ever have been
there are a lot more electronics there
are a lot more sensors there are a lot
more sensitive parts that can be very
very costly to replace the last thing
you want to do is be in a situation
where you're making payments on your
vehicle at the sixth year or seventh
year and it starts to require costly
repairs and at the same time it's worth
very little if you want to sell the
vehicle in your opinion for the average
person what is the best length of time
for a car loan no more than five years I
would say ideally for years but you
could stretch it to fires
okay seven and eight no no no no no
really if you free stretching alone 270
years you can't afford that car right
forget it
good advice and she does hear it but
only a couple of times that's your
payment for five years that's the
payment for four years
even more rare salespeople who warned
about longer loans that's a great advice
it really is I'm surprised actually
there is no question he is telling her
the truth and on this is what you think
people should be seeing absolutely
insider secrets will give them enough
information to make a decision but we're
not gonna point out all the negative the
ride continues on your marketplace we're
testing the advice you get at
dealerships about car loans that to me
is is short-sighted just a recipe for
for problems problems leading many
Canadians into a spiral of debt they
can't escape
[Applause]
twenty-four-year-old Chantel Matthews
knows all about it she's working two
jobs to pay off one massive car loan
basically wake up go to work
[Music]
job number one and a building supply
center in Bracebridge Ontario yeah one
second she's here from 7:00 to 5:00 and
of this shift is the beginning of the
next let's give it a ride how much sleep
do you usually get when you're working
two jobs like this between three to four
hours you must be exhausted a lot of the
time yeah it does take a toll on you
job number two goes late at the local
pub by the time she closes it's almost
3:00 a.m.
[Music]
chantell's
troubles began when she bought a new
hyundai on an eight-year loan I wanted a
vehicle that was cheap reliable you know
half-decent will last you a while 158 I
believe every two weeks
seemed affordable but the car kept
breaking down the fan and the fan motor
went the alternator went and then wheel
bearings started going and this is all
within three months of owning a brand
new car
she says the dealership wouldn't take it
back
told her to trade it in for a new one
but the car was now worth much less than
she paid for it they said you have to
carry some of it over because you cited
for the car the cars been used that
difference between what she owed and
what the car was worth is called
negative equity it's not good and it
cost you and it cost you big-time
sure does it means $17,000 in old debt
was added to the loan for this new car
with the two cars it was about 50 grand
$50,000 yep
you seemed very calm about guys I've
accepted the fact because I still have
to pay it I can't get out of it so I had
to pay them there are thousands of
Chantelle's out there a quarter of all
cars being traded in for new ones still
have money owing on them did anybody
ever explain what negative equity was no
they did not explain the negative equity
to a detail back on hidden camera that's
what we're testing next
how will salespeople explain negative
equity and trade ends
six kids in the next three years okay
thanks
he finally gets to his point early
trade-ins her cinch we can trade in your
vehicle anytime not how our experts see
it absolutely I mean that's crazy this
is all about negative equity that's
three or four years you owe more than
the cars worth a lot more
in fact you owe more on your car than
it's worth until five and a half years
into a seven-year loan any time you
wanna trade it in you can trade it in we
pay off the loan you pay off the loan we
do yes no you're paying the bank the
Minor is that you owe but they are
charging you yeah they are adding that
to the get to the price of the new
vehicle the debt just keeps on piling on
and it's very dangerous I'm just
wondering though that eighty four months
and then because if I bring it in three
to four years that's still like half the
car that's not paid off yet and you just
get rid of that money where does it go
because we then okay we're showing that
explanation to Ontario's auto regulator
yeah that's very troubling to just say
we pay off the loan well how do you pay
it off you don't just pay off the loan
John Carmichael doesn't like what he
sees and this is my worry as consumers
who aren't able to either understand or
manage that situation and they find
themselves in a transaction that that's
going to come back to haunt them down
the road do you see this as following
the rules I would challenge both of what
those individuals said on the basis that
they haven't provided honest information
to the consumer so why might salespeople
break their rules we meet a man on the
inside he's worked in sales and finance
for a decade knows about the pressures
at dealerships
just sell the car yeah that's what their
salesmen just gonna want to know at the
end of the day you talk to the person
why didn't you sell them the car we're
hide
his identity because he still works in
the industry
no one dealership is gonna turn down a
deal where we're not ultimately their
financial adviser will give them enough
information to make a decision but we're
not gonna point out all the negatives
all the potential pitfalls not in your
interest to tell people about no
downsides of trade ins correct you may
get a new car yeah but you may keep the
old debt yeah you're gonna get a new
term again a new payment and you know
goes forever right do you think there
should be definite rules that require a
salesperson or a dealership to clearly
explain the basics to a customer yes at
the very least the basics of negative
equity so that people are going into the
transaction with open eyes we bring that
idea back to aam Vic Ontario's regulator
in fact I think you you actually may
have this document but this type of
document which talks to issues around
negative equity Carmichael says he's
putting the pamphlet into government
offices across Ontario we turn it into a
poster but you won't see it in the one
place you might expect it why isn't
something like that of this size in a
dealership in a place where people are
actually buying a couple it is brand new
happy to do that
that makes sense I like it yeah I'd love
to see that on every sales desk you
could require it
well you I don't know that dealers are
going to go that far with it but
certainly for the consumer absolutely
it's a good thing to have but it isn't
compulsory just hope you can find
someone you can spell it out like this
change it you've got old money on that
card right so you all exit say you all
twenty one twenty two thousand occupies
about fifteen that six thousand dollars
will go to a new part of your financing
this employee desert deserves employee
of the Year award congratulations Tim so
few though get that advice Chantel will
be paying for years to come I don't
freak out this has changed the early
part of your life yep and I looked in
this getting a house and they won't
approve me because of how much I
in the car a debt so you can't basically
do anything until it's paid down how
much time do you have left on this loan
about four and a half years about four
and a half years what are the next four
and a half years your life looked like
definitely change now basically I have a
baby on the way and congratulations
thank you can you work two jobs 74 hours
a week for the next four and a half
years no how you gonna do it I don't
know yet
I'll have to figure it out meantime we
can't figure out her paperwork there are
a number of red flags that jump off the
page at me right off the bat is this a
breach is this illegal it is searching
for answers on your marketplace sign up
for our weekly newsletter at cbc.ca
slash marketplace gearing up for more
marketplace we've been investigating
long term Carlos okay sounds like a deal
but sales people aren't always upfront
about risk to car buyers and they find
themselves in a transaction that that's
going to come back to haunt them down
the road it happened to Chantel matheus
with the two cars it was about 50 grand
$50,000
she owes that much because she traded in
her unreliable car early the money she
still owed was added to her new purchase
but check out her paperwork no mention
of that debt or negative equity instead
there's additional retail value on her
second car as if she opted for features
like fancy speakers or better seats I
bring that to the regulator the rules
say the paperwork should be clear the
mathematical gymnastics that appear on
this page are astounding to me this is
anything but clear in fact when you did
send this over to us yesterday we tried
to figure out what we could and had a
terrible time trying to figure out
exactly what the represent and you guys
are the experts and where do you
understand all this the theory there are
a number of red flags that jump off the
page at me right off the bat that in
fact is your negative equity they're
hiding it up on a line as additional
retail value so they're they're putting
it in the value of the vehicle as
opposed to showing the actual debt
that's outstanding
is this a breach is this illegal it is
it's both yes and this is something I'd
like to have my people work into they
are concerned the dealership may have
breached the ethical code and the law
hid the negative equity leaving it
unclear just what Shawntel is paying for
we are most concerned about consumers
making educated decisions there are
concerns that people not get in over
their head or get into long enough term
loans that that they're going to end up
with significant debt down the road that
they simply can't afford so it'd be 2568
Chantel is chipping away halfway through
her massive loan biggest forget going
into debt that much thinking that I
could get out of it within the eight
years why'd you want to talk about this
just so no one else makes the same
mistake I did
it's not about my car it could be anyone
it'd be any age it can be your mom your
brother your friend next door
they could have the same problem in fact
there are lots of people lots of
Canadians just like this and they're
just drowning in debt attention online
shoppers they almost only shop online I
look for the best deals a marketplace
test on your mark get set search
different shoppers different prices for
the same room oh my gosh
they're different in different browsers
the more information they have the more
they can prey upon your desires a Black
Friday special or your marketplace
[Music]